Chapter 4
On Sunday morning while church bells rang
in the villages alongshore, the world and
its mistress returned to Gatsby’s house
and twinkled hilariously on his lawn.
“He’s a bootlegger,” said the young
ladies, moving somewhere between his cocktails
and his flowers. “One time he killed a man
who had found out that he was nephew to Von
Hindenburg and second cousin to the devil.
Reach me a rose, honey, and pour me a last
drop into that there crystal glass.”
Once I wrote down on the empty spaces of a
time-table the names of those who came to
Gatsby’s house that summer. It is an old
time-table now, disintegrating at its folds,
and headed “This schedule in effect July
5th, 1922.” But I can still read the gray
names, and they will give you a better impression
than my generalities of those who accepted
Gatsby’s hospitality and paid him the subtle
tribute of knowing nothing whatever about
him.
From East Egg, then, came the Chester Beckers
and the Leeches, and a man named Bunsen, whom
I knew at Yale, and Doctor Webster Civet,
who was drowned last summer up in Maine. And
the Hornbeams and the Willie Voltaires, and
a whole clan named Blackbuck, who always gathered
in a corner and flipped up their noses like
goats at whosoever came near. And the Ismays
and the Chrysties (or rather Hubert Auerbach
and Mr. Chrystie’s wife), and Edgar Beaver,
whose hair, they say, turned cotton-white
one winter afternoon for no good reason at
all.
Clarence Endive was from East Egg, as I remember.
He came only once, in white knickerbockers,
and had a fight with a bum named Etty in the
garden. From farther out on the Island came
the Cheadles and the O. R. P. Schraeders,
and the Stonewall Jackson Abrams of Georgia,
and the Fishguards and the Ripley Snells.
Snell was there three days before he went
to the penitentiary, so drunk out on the gravel
drive that Mrs. Ulysses Swett’s automobile
ran over his right hand. The Dancies came,
too, and S. B. Whitebait, who was well over
sixty, and Maurice A. Flink, and the Hammerheads,
and Beluga the tobacco importer, and Beluga’s
girls.
From West Egg came the Poles and the Mulreadys
and Cecil Roebuck and Cecil Schoen and Gulick
the state senator and Newton Orchid, who controlled
Films Par Excellence, and Eckhaust and Clyde
Cohen and Don S. Schwartze (the son) and Arthur
McCarty, all connected with the movies in
one way or another. And the Catlips and the
Bembergs and G. Earl Muldoon, brother to that
Muldoon who afterward strangled his wife.
Da Fontano the promoter came there, and Ed
Legros and James B. (“Rot-Gut.”) Ferret
and the De Jongs and Ernest Lilly — they
came to gamble, and when Ferret wandered into
the garden it meant he was cleaned out and
Associated Traction would have to fluctuate
profitably next day.
A man named Klipspringer was there so often
and so long that he became known as “the
boarder.”— I doubt if he had any other
home. Of theatrical people there were Gus
Waize and Horace O’donavan and Lester Meyer
and George Duckweed and Francis Bull. Also
from New York were the Chromes and the Backhyssons
and the Dennickers and Russel Betty and the
Corrigans and the Kellehers and the Dewars
and the Scullys and S. W. Belcher and the
Smirkes and the young Quinns, divorced now,
and Henry L. Palmetto, who killed himself
by jumping in front of a subway train in Times
Square.
Benny McClenahan arrived always with four
girls. They were never quite the same ones
in physical person, but they were so identical
one with another that it inevitably seemed
they had been there before. I have forgotten
their names — Jaqueline, I think, or else
Consuela, or Gloria or Judy or June, and their
last names were either the melodious names
of flowers and months or the sterner ones
of the great American capitalists whose cousins,
if pressed, they would confess themselves
to be.
In addition to all these I can remember that
Faustina O’Brien came there at least once
and the Baedeker girls and young Brewer, who
had his nose shot off in the war, and Mr.
Albrucksburger and Miss Haag, his fiancee,
and Ardita Fitz-Peters and Mr. P. Jewett,
once head of the American Legion, and Miss
Claudia Hip, with a man reputed to be her
chauffeur, and a prince of something, whom
we called Duke, and whose name, if I ever
knew it, I have forgotten.
All these people came to Gatsby’s house
in the summer.
At nine o’clock, one morning late in July,
Gatsby’s gorgeous car lurched up the rocky
drive to my door and gave out a burst of melody
from its three-noted horn. It was the first
time he had called on me, though I had gone
to two of his parties, mounted in his hydroplane,
and, at his urgent invitation, made frequent
use of his beach.
“Good morning, old sport. You’re having
lunch with me to-day and I thought we’d
ride up together.”
He was balancing himself on the dashboard
of his car with that resourcefulness of movement
that is so peculiarly American — that comes,
I suppose, with the absence of lifting work
or rigid sitting in youth and, even more,
with the formless grace of our nervous, sporadic
games. This quality was continually breaking
through his punctilious manner in the shape
of restlessness. He was never quite still;
there was always a tapping foot somewhere
or the impatient opening and closing of a
hand.
He saw me looking with admiration at his car.
“It’s pretty, isn’t it, old sport?”
He jumped off to give me a better view. “Haven’t
you ever seen it before?”
I’d seen it. Everybody had seen it. It was
a rich cream color, bright with nickel, swollen
here and there in its monstrous length with
triumphant hat-boxes and supper-boxes and
tool-boxes, and terraced with a labyrinth
of wind-shields that mirrored a dozen suns.
Sitting down behind many layers of glass in
a sort of green leather conservatory, we started
to town.
I had talked with him perhaps half a dozen
times in the past month and found, to my disappointment,
that he had little to say: So my first impression,
that he was a person of some undefined consequence,
had gradually faded and he had become simply
the proprietor of an elaborate road-house
next door.
And then came that disconcerting ride. We
hadn’t reached West Egg village before Gatsby
began leaving his elegant sentences unfinished
and slapping himself indecisively on the knee
of his caramel-colored suit.
“Look here, old sport,” he broke out surprisingly.
“What’s your opinion of me, anyhow?”
A little overwhelmed, I began the generalized
evasions which that question deserves.
“Well, I’m going to tell you something
about my life,” he interrupted. “I don’t
want you to get a wrong idea of me from all
these stories you hear.”
So he was aware of the bizarre accusations
that flavored conversation in his halls.
“I’ll tell you God’s truth.” His right
hand suddenly ordered divine retribution to
stand by. “I am the son of some wealthy
people in the Middle West — all dead now.
I was brought up in America but educated at
Oxford, because all my ancestors have been
educated there for many years. It is a family
tradition.”
He looked at me sideways — and I knew why
Jordan Baker had believed he was lying. He
hurried the phrase “educated at Oxford,”
or swallowed it, or choked on it, as though
it had bothered him before. And with this
doubt, his whole statement fell to pieces,
and I wondered if there wasn’t something
a little sinister about him, after all.
“What part of the Middle West?” I inquired
casually.
“San Francisco.”
“I see.”
“My family all died and I came into a good
deal of money.”
His voice was solemn, as if the memory of
that sudden extinction of a clan still haunted
him. For a moment I suspected that he was
pulling my leg, but a glance at him convinced
me otherwise.
“After that I lived like a young rajah in
all the capitals of Europe — Paris, Venice,
Rome — collecting jewels, chiefly rubies,
hunting big game, painting a little, things
for myself only, and trying to forget something
very sad that had happened to me long ago.”
With an effort I managed to restrain my incredulous
laughter. The very phrases were worn so threadbare
that they evoked no image except that of a
turbaned “character” leaking sawdust at
every pore as he pursued a tiger through the
Bois de Boulogne.
“Then came the war, old sport. It was a
great relief, and I tried very hard to die,
but I seemed to bear an enchanted life. I
accepted a commission as first lieutenant
when it began. In the Argonne Forest I took
two machine-gun detachments so far forward
that there was a half mile gap on either side
of us where the infantry couldn’t advance.
We stayed there two days and two nights, a
hundred and thirty men with sixteen Lewis
guns, and when the infantry came up at last
they found the insignia of three German divisions
among the piles of dead. I was promoted to
be a major, and every Allied government gave
me a decoration — even Montenegro, little
Montenegro down on the Adriatic Sea!”
Little Montenegro! He lifted up the words
and nodded at them — with his smile. The
smile comprehended Montenegro’s troubled
history and sympathized with the brave struggles
of the Montenegrin people. It appreciated
fully the chain of national circumstances
which had elicited this tribute from Montenegro’s
warm little heart. My incredulity was submerged
in fascination now; it was like skimming hastily
through a dozen magazines.
He reached in his pocket, and a piece of metal,
slung on a ribbon, fell into my palm.
“That’s the one from Montenegro.”
To my astonishment, the thing had an authentic
look.
“Orderi di Danilo,” ran the circular legend,
“Montenegro, Nicolas Rex.”
“Turn it.”
“Major Jay Gatsby,” I read, “For Valour
Extraordinary.”
“Here’s another thing I always carry.
A souvenir of Oxford days. It was taken in
Trinity Quad — the man on my left is now
the Earl of Dorcaster.”
It was a photograph of half a dozen young
men in blazers loafing in an archway through
which were visible a host of spires. There
was Gatsby, looking a little, not much, younger
— with a cricket bat in his hand.
Then it was all true. I saw the skins of tigers
flaming in his palace on the Grand Canal;
I saw him opening a chest of rubies to ease,
with their crimson-lighted depths, the gnawings
of his broken heart.
“I’m going to make a big request of you
to-day,” he said, pocketing his souvenirs
with satisfaction, “so I thought you ought
to know something about me. I didn’t want
you to think I was just some nobody. You see,
I usually find myself among strangers because
I drift here and there trying to forget the
sad thing that happened to me.” He hesitated.
“You’ll hear about it this afternoon.”
“At lunch?”
“No, this afternoon. I happened to find
out that you’re taking Miss Baker to tea.”
“Do you mean you’re in love with Miss
Baker?”
“No, old sport, I’m not. But Miss Baker
has kindly consented to speak to you about
this matter.”
I hadn’t the faintest idea what “this
matter” was, but I was more annoyed than
interested. I hadn’t asked Jordan to tea
in order to discuss Mr. Jay Gatsby. I was
sure the request would be something utterly
fantastic, and for a moment I was sorry I’d
ever set foot upon his overpopulated lawn.
He wouldn’t say another word. His correctness
grew on him as we neared the city. We passed
Port Roosevelt, where there was a glimpse
of red-belted ocean-going ships, and sped
along a cobbled slum lined with the dark,
undeserted saloons of the faded-gilt nineteen-hundreds.
Then the valley of ashes opened out on both
sides of us, and I had a glimpse of Mrs. Wilson
straining at the garage pump with panting
vitality as we went by.
With fenders spread like wings we scattered
light through half Long Island City — only
half, for as we twisted among the pillars
of the elevated I heard the familiar “jug
— jug — spat!” of a motorcycle, and
a frantic policeman rode alongside.
“All right, old sport,” called Gatsby.
We slowed down. Taking a white card from his
wallet, he waved it before the man’s eyes.
“Right you are,” agreed the policeman,
tipping his cap. “Know you next time, Mr.
Gatsby. Excuse me!”
“What was that?” I inquired.
“The picture of Oxford?”
“I was able to do the commissioner a favor
once, and he sends me a Christmas card every
year.”
Over the great bridge, with the sunlight through
the girders making a constant flicker upon
the moving cars, with the city rising up across
the river in white heaps and sugar lumps all
built with a wish out of non-olfactory money.
The city seen from the Queensboro Bridge is
always the city seen for the first time, in
its first wild promise of all the mystery
and the beauty in the world.
A dead man passed us in a hearse heaped with
blooms, followed by two carriages with drawn
blinds, and by more cheerful carriages for
friends. The friends looked out at us with
the tragic eyes and short upper lips of southeastern
Europe, and I was glad that the sight of Gatsby’s
splendid car was included in their sombre
holiday. As we crossed Blackwell’s Island
a limousine passed us, driven by a white chauffeur,
in which sat three modish negroes, two bucks
and a girl. I laughed aloud as the yolks of
their eyeballs rolled toward us in haughty
rivalry.
“Anything can happen now that we’ve slid
over this bridge,” I thought; “anything
at all. . . . ”
Even Gatsby could happen, without any particular
wonder.
Roaring noon. In a well-fanned Forty-second
Street cellar I met Gatsby for lunch. Blinking
away the brightness of the street outside,
my eyes picked him out obscurely in the anteroom,
talking to another man.
“Mr. Carraway, this is my friend Mr. Wolfsheim.”
A small, flat-nosed Jew raised his large head
and regarded me with two fine growths of hair
which luxuriated in either nostril. After
a moment I discovered his tiny eyes in the
half-darkness.
“— So I took one look at him,” said
Mr. Wolfsheim, shaking my hand earnestly,
“and what do you think I did?”
“What?” I inquired politely.
But evidently he was not addressing me, for
he dropped my hand and covered Gatsby with
his expressive nose.
“I handed the money to Katspaugh and I said:
‘all right, Katspaugh, don’t pay him a
penny till he shuts his mouth.’ He shut
it then and there.”
Gatsby took an arm of each of us and moved
forward into the restaurant, whereupon Mr.
Wolfsheim swallowed a new sentence he was
starting and lapsed into a somnambulatory
abstraction.
“Highballs?” asked the head waiter.
“This is a nice restaurant here,” said
Mr. Wolfsheim, looking at the Presbyterian
nymphs on the ceiling. “But I like across
the street better!”
“Yes, highballs,” agreed Gatsby, and then
to Mr. Wolfsheim: “It’s too hot over there.”
“Hot and small — yes,” said Mr. Wolfsheim,
“but full of memories.”
“What place is that?” I asked.
“The old Metropole.
“The old Metropole,” brooded Mr. Wolfsheim
gloomily. “Filled with faces dead and gone.
Filled with friends gone now forever. I can’t
forget so long as I live the night they shot
Rosy Rosenthal there. It was six of us at
the table, and Rosy had eat and drunk a lot
all evening. When it was almost morning the
waiter came up to him with a funny look and
says somebody wants to speak to him outside.
‘All right,’ says Rosy, and begins to
get up, and I pulled him down in his chair.
“‘Let the bastards come in here if they
want you, Rosy, but don’t you, so help me,
move outside this room.’
“It was four o’clock in the morning then,
and if we’d of raised the blinds we’d
of seen daylight.”
“Did he go?” I asked innocently.
“Sure he went.” Mr. Wolfsheim’s nose
flashed at me indignantly. “He turned around
in the door and says: ‘Don’t let that
waiter take away my coffee!’ Then he went
out on the sidewalk, and they shot him three
times in his full belly and drove away.”
“Four of them were electrocuted,” I said,
remembering.
“Five, with Becker.” His nostrils turned
to me in an interested way. “I understand
you’re looking for a business gonnegtion.”
The juxtaposition of these two remarks was
startling. Gatsby answered for me:
“Oh, no,” he exclaimed, “this isn’t
the man.”
“No?” Mr. Wolfsheim seemed disappointed.
“This is just a friend. I told you we’d
talk about that some other time.”
“I beg your pardon,” said Mr. Wolfsheim,
“I had a wrong man.”
A succulent hash arrived, and Mr. Wolfsheim,
forgetting the more sentimental atmosphere
of the old Metropole, began to eat with ferocious
delicacy. His eyes, meanwhile, roved very
slowly all around the room — he completed
the arc by turning to inspect the people directly
behind. I think that, except for my presence,
he would have taken one short glance beneath
our own table.
“Look here, old sport,” said Gatsby, leaning
toward me, “I’m afraid I made you a little
angry this morning in the car.”
There was the smile again, but this time I
held out against it.
“I don’t like mysteries,” I answered.
“And I don’t understand why you won’t
come out frankly and tell me what you want.
Why has it all got to come through Miss Baker?”
“Oh, it’s nothing underhand,” he assured
me. “Miss Baker’s a great sportswoman,
you know, and she’d never do anything that
wasn’t all right.”
Suddenly he looked at his watch, jumped up,
and hurried from the room, leaving me with
Mr. Wolfsheim at the table.
“He has to telephone,” said Mr. Wolfsheim,
following him with his eyes. “Fine fellow,
isn’t he? Handsome to look at and a perfect
gentleman.”
“Yes.”
“He’s an Oggsford man.”
“Oh!”
“He went to Oggsford College in England.
You know Oggsford College?”
“I’ve heard of it.”
“It’s one of the most famous colleges
in the world.”
“Have you known Gatsby for a long time?”
I inquired.
“Several years,” he answered in a gratified
way. “I made the pleasure of his acquaintance
just after the war. But I knew I had discovered
a man of fine breeding after I talked with
him an hour. I said to myself: ‘There’s
the kind of man you’d like to take home
and introduce to your mother and sister.’.”
He paused. “I see you’re looking at my
cuff buttons.” I hadn’t been looking at
them, but I did now.
They were composed of oddly familiar pieces
of ivory.
“Finest specimens of human molars,” he
informed me.
“Well!” I inspected them. “That’s
a very interesting idea.”
“Yeah.” He flipped his sleeves up under
his coat. “Yeah, Gatsby’s very careful
about women. He would never so much as look
at a friend’s wife.”
When the subject of this instinctive trust
returned to the table and sat down Mr. Wolfsheim
drank his coffee with a jerk and got to his
feet.
“I have enjoyed my lunch,” he said, “and
I’m going to run off from you two young
men before I outstay my welcome.”
“Don’t hurry, Meyer,” said Gatsby, without
enthusiasm. Mr. Wolfsheim raised his hand
in a sort of benediction.
“You’re very polite, but I belong to another
generation,” he announced solemnly. “You
sit here and discuss your sports and your
young ladies and your ——” He supplied
an imaginary noun with another wave of his
hand. “As for me, I am fifty years old,
and I won’t impose myself on you any longer.”
As he shook hands and turned away his tragic
nose was trembling. I wondered if I had said
anything to offend him.
“He becomes very sentimental sometimes,”
explained Gatsby. “This is one of his sentimental
days. He’s quite a character around New
York — a denizen of Broadway.”
“Who is he, anyhow, an actor?”
“No.”
“A dentist?”
“Meyer Wolfsheim? No, he’s a gambler.”
Gatsby hesitated, then added coolly: “He’s
the man who fixed the World’s Series back
in 1919.”
“Fixed the World’s Series?” I repeated.
The idea staggered me. I remembered, of course,
that the World’s Series had been fixed in
1919, but if I had thought of it at all I
would have thought of it as a thing that merely
happened, the end of some inevitable chain.
It never occurred to me that one man could
start to play with the faith of fifty million
people — with the single-mindedness of a
burglar blowing a safe.
“How did he happen to do that?” I asked
after a minute.
“He just saw the opportunity.”
“Why isn’t he in jail?”
“They can’t get him, old sport. He’s
a smart man.”
I insisted on paying the check. As the waiter
brought my change I caught sight of Tom Buchanan
across the crowded room.
“Come along with me for a minute,” I said;
“I’ve got to say hello to some one.”
When he saw us Tom jumped up and took half
a dozen steps in our direction.
“Where’ve you been?” he demanded eagerly.
“Daisy’s furious because you haven’t
called up.”
“This is Mr. Gatsby, Mr. Buchanan.”
They shook hands briefly, and a strained,
unfamiliar look of embarrassment came over
Gatsby’s face.
“How’ve you been, anyhow?” demanded
Tom of me. “How’d you happen to come up
this far to eat?”
“I’ve been having lunch with Mr. Gatsby.”
I turned toward Mr. Gatsby, but he was no
longer there.
One October day in nineteen-seventeen ——
(said Jordan Baker that afternoon, sitting
up very straight on a straight chair in the
tea-garden at the Plaza Hotel)
— I was walking along from one place to
another, half on the sidewalks and half on
the lawns. I was happier on the lawns because
I had on shoes from England with rubber nobs
on the soles that bit into the soft ground.
I had on a new plaid skirt also that blew
a little in the wind, and whenever this happened
the red, white, and blue banners in front
of all the houses stretched out stiff and
said tut-tut-tut-tut, in a disapproving way.
The largest of the banners and the largest
of the lawns belonged to Daisy Fay’s house.
She was just eighteen, two years older than
me, and by far the most popular of all the
young girls in Louisville. She dressed in
white, and had a little white roadster, and
all day long the telephone rang in her house
and excited young officers from Camp Taylor
demanded the privilege of monopolizing her
that night. “Anyways, for an hour!”
When I came opposite her house that morning
her white roadster was beside the curb, and
she was sitting in it with a lieutenant I
had never seen before. They were so engrossed
in each other that she didn’t see me until
I was five feet away.
“Hello, Jordan,” she called unexpectedly.
“Please come here.”
I was flattered that she wanted to speak to
me, because of all the older girls I admired
her most. She asked me if I was going to the
Red Cross and make bandages. I was. Well,
then, would I tell them that she couldn’t
come that day? The officer looked at Daisy
while she was speaking, in a way that every
young girl wants to be looked at sometime,
and because it seemed romantic to me I have
remembered the incident ever since. His name
was Jay Gatsby, and I didn’t lay eyes on
him again for over four years — even after
I’d met him on Long Island I didn’t realize
it was the same man.
That was nineteen-seventeen. By the next year
I had a few beaux myself, and I began to play
in tournaments, so I didn’t see Daisy very
often. She went with a slightly older crowd
— when she went with anyone at all. Wild
rumors were circulating about her — how
her mother had found her packing her bag one
winter night to go to New York and say good-by
to a soldier who was going overseas. She was
effectually prevented, but she wasn’t on
speaking terms with her family for several
weeks. After that she didn’t play around
with the soldiers any more, but only with
a few flat-footed, short-sighted young men
in town, who couldn’t get into the army
at all.
By the next autumn she was gay again, gay
as ever. She had a debut after the Armistice,
and in February she was presumably engaged
to a man from New Orleans. In June she married
Tom Buchanan of Chicago, with more pomp and
circumstance than Louisville ever knew before.
He came down with a hundred people in four
private cars, and hired a whole floor of the
Muhlbach Hotel, and the day before the wedding
he gave her a string of pearls valued at three
hundred and fifty thousand dollars.
I was bridesmaid. I came into her room half
an hour before the bridal dinner, and found
her lying on her bed as lovely as the June
night in her flowered dress — and as drunk
as a monkey. She had a bottle of Sauterne
in one hand and a letter in the other.
“’Gratulate me,” she muttered. “Never
had a drink before, but oh how I do enjoy
it.”
“What’s the matter, Daisy?”
I was scared, I can tell you; I’d never
seen a girl like that before.
“Here, deares’.” She groped around in
a waste-basket she had with her on the bed
and pulled out the string of pearls. “Take
’em down-stairs and give ’em back to whoever
they belong to. Tell ’em all Daisy’s change’
her mine. Say: ‘Daisy’s change’ her
mine!’.”
She began to cry — she cried and cried.
I rushed out and found her mother’s maid,
and we locked the door and got her into a
cold bath. She wouldn’t let go of the letter.
She took it into the tub with her and squeezed
it up into a wet ball, and only let me leave
it in the soap-dish when she saw that it was
coming to pieces like snow.
But she didn’t say another word. We gave
her spirits of ammonia and put ice on her
forehead and hooked her back into her dress,
and half an hour later, when we walked out
of the room, the pearls were around her neck
and the incident was over. Next day at five
o’clock she married Tom Buchanan without
so much as a shiver, and started off on a
three months’ trip to the South Seas.
I saw them in Santa Barbara when they came
back, and I thought I’d never seen a girl
so mad about her husband. If he left the room
for a minute she’d look around uneasily,
and say: “Where’s Tom gone?” and wear
the most abstracted expression until she saw
him coming in the door. She used to sit on
the sand with his head in her lap by the hour,
rubbing her fingers over his eyes and looking
at him with unfathomable delight. It was touching
to see them together — it made you laugh
in a hushed, fascinated way. That was in August.
A week after I left Santa Barbara Tom ran
into a wagon on the Ventura road one night,
and ripped a front wheel off his car. The
girl who was with him got into the papers,
too, because her arm was broken — she was
one of the chambermaids in the Santa Barbara
Hotel.
The next April Daisy had her little girl,
and they went to France for a year. I saw
them one spring in Cannes, and later in Deauville,
and then they came back to Chicago to settle
down. Daisy was popular in Chicago, as you
know. They moved with a fast crowd, all of
them young and rich and wild, but she came
out with an absolutely perfect reputation.
Perhaps because she doesn’t drink. It’s
a great advantage not to drink among hard-drinking
people. You can hold your tongue, and, moreover,
you can time any little irregularity of your
own so that everybody else is so blind that
they don’t see or care. Perhaps Daisy never
went in for amour at all — and yet there’s
something in that voice of hers. . . .
Well, about six weeks ago, she heard the name
Gatsby for the first time in years. It was
when I asked you — do you remember? — if
you knew Gatsby in West Egg. After you had
gone home she came into my room and woke me
up, and said: “What Gatsby?” and when
I described him — I was half asleep — she
said in the strangest voice that it must be
the man she used to know. It wasn’t until
then that I connected this Gatsby with the
officer in her white car.
When Jordan Baker had finished telling all
this we had left the Plaza for half an hour
and were driving in a victoria through Central
Park. The sun had gone down behind the tall
apartments of the movie stars in the West
Fifties, and the clear voices of girls, already
gathered like crickets on the grass, rose
through the hot twilight:
“I’m the Sheik of Araby.
Your love belongs to me.
At night when you’re are asleep
Into your tent I’ll creep ——”
“It was a strange coincidence,” I said.
“But it wasn’t a coincidence at all.”
“Why not?”
“Gatsby bought that house so that Daisy
would be just across the bay.”
Then it had not been merely the stars to which
he had aspired on that June night. He came
alive to me, delivered suddenly from the womb
of his purposeless splendor.
“He wants to know,” continued Jordan,
“if you’ll invite Daisy to your house
some afternoon and then let him come over.”
The modesty of the demand shook me. He had
waited five years and bought a mansion where
he dispensed starlight to casual moths — so
that he could “come over” some afternoon
to a stranger’s garden.
“Did I have to know all this before he could
ask such a little thing?”
“He’s afraid, he’s waited so long. He
thought you might be offended. You see, he’s
a regular tough underneath it all.”
Something worried me.
“Why didn’t he ask you to arrange a meeting?”
“He wants her to see his house,” she explained.
“And your house is right next door.”
“Oh!”
“I think he half expected her to wander
into one of his parties, some night,” went
on Jordan, “but she never did. Then he began
asking people casually if they knew her, and
I was the first one he found. It was that
night he sent for me at his dance, and you
should have heard the elaborate way he worked
up to it. Of course, I immediately suggested
a luncheon in New York — and I thought he’d
go mad:
“‘I don’t want to do anything out of
the way!’ he kept saying. ‘I want to see
her right next door.’
“When I said you were a particular friend
of Tom’s, he started to abandon the whole
idea. He doesn’t know very much about Tom,
though he says he’s read a Chicago paper
for years just on the chance of catching a
glimpse of Daisy’s name.”
It was dark now, and as we dipped under a
little bridge I put my arm around Jordan’s
golden shoulder and drew her toward me and
asked her to dinner. Suddenly I wasn’t thinking
of Daisy and Gatsby any more, but of this
clean, hard, limited person, who dealt in
universal scepticism, and who leaned back
jauntily just within the circle of my arm.
A phrase began to beat in my ears with a sort
of heady excitement: “There are only the
pursued, the pursuing, the busy and the tired.”
“And Daisy ought to have something in her
life,” murmured Jordan to me.
“Does she want to see Gatsby?”
“She’s not to know about it. Gatsby doesn’t
want her to know. You’re just supposed to
invite her to tea.”
We passed a barrier of dark trees, and then
the facade of Fifty-ninth Street, a block
of delicate pale light, beamed down into the
park. Unlike Gatsby and Tom Buchanan, I had
no girl whose disembodied face floated along
the dark cornices and blinding signs, and
so I drew up the girl beside me, tightening
my arms. Her wan, scornful mouth smiled, and
so I drew her up again closer, this time to
my face.